Foundations of Cybersecurity

Cybersecurity(or security)
Ensuring confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information by protecting networks, devices, people, and data from unauthorized access or criminal exploitation. 

Threat Actor
Any person or group who presents a security risk

Benefits of security
	Protects against external and internal threats
	Meets regulatory compliance
	Maintain and improve business productivity
	Reduces risks
	Maintain brand trust

Common job titles
	Security analyst or specialist
	Cybersecurity analyst or specialist
	Security Operation Center (SOC) analyst
	Information security analyst

Responsibilities of an entry-level cybersecurity analyst
Monitoring and protecting information and systems
	Protecting computer and network systems
	Installing prevention software → Work with development teams to implement software or hardware
	Conducting periodic security audits → things like making sure passwords are kept private
Monitoring networks for breaches
Develop strategies to secure an organization and research information technology (IT) security trends to remain alert and informed about potential threats. 
Prevent incidents

Key Cybersecurity Terms and Concepts

Compliance 
The process of adhering to internal standards and external regulations enables an organization to avoid fines and security breaches

Security Frameworks
Guidelines used for building plans to help mitigate risks and threats to data and privacy

Security Controls
Safeguards designed to reduce specific security risks
They are used with security frameworks to establish a strong security posture. 

Security Posture
An organization's ability to manage its defense of critical assets and data and react to change
A strong security posture leads to lower risk for the organization. 

Threat Actor (or malicious attacker)
Any perso or group who presents a security risk
The risk can relate to computers, applications, networks, and data

Internal Threat
It can be a current or former employee, an external vendor, or a trusted partner who poses a security risk

Network Security
The practice of keeping an organization’s network infrastructure secure from unauthorized access. 
This includes data, services, systems, and devices that are stored in an organization’s network 

Cloud Security
Process of ensuring that assets stored in the cloud are properly configured or set up correctly, and access to those assets is limited to authorized users
The cloud is a network made up of a collection of servers or computers that store resources and data in a remote physical location known as data centers that can be accessed via the internet
Cloud security is a growing subfield of cybersecurity that specifically focuses on the protection of data, applications, and infrastructure in the cloud

Programming
Process that can be used to create a specific set of instructions for a computer to execute tasks
These tasks include:
	Automation or repetitive tasks (e.g. searching a list of malicious domains)
	Reviewing web traffic
	Alerting suspicious activity

Security Analyst Transferable Skills
	Communication → document and report any findings
	Collaboration → with stakeholders and other team members
	Analysis
	Problem-solving → proactively identify and solve problems
	Time management → prioritizing tasks appropriately 
	Growth mindset → willingness and motivation to keep learning 
	Intellectual curiosity
	Diverse perspective → having respect for each other

Security Analyst Technical Skills
Programming languages → Python and SQL → Analysts may sometimes work with software development teams to analyze and support security, install software, and set up appropriate processes. When involved with software development projects, it can be helpful for an analyst to understand programming languages.
Security information and event management (SIEM) tools → collect and analyze log data, or record events such as unusual login behavior. When security analysts need to review vulnerabilities, they conduct a periodic security audit. This is a review of an organization’s records, activities, and related documents. During audits, Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) tools help analysts better understand security threats, risks, and vulnerabilities.
Computer forensics 
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDs) →monitor system activity and alerts for possible intrusion
Threat landscape knowledge → Being aware of the current trends related to threat actors, malware, or threat methodologies
Incident response → following established policies and procedures to respond to incidents appropriately 

Personally Indefinable Information (PII)
Any information used to infer an individual’s identity
Includes persons’ full name, date of birth, address, phone number, email address, IP address

Sensitive Personally Identifiable Information (SPII)
A specific type of PII that falls under stricter handling guidelines
May include social security numbers, medical and financial data, and biometric data(e.g. Facial recognition)
Key assets that a threat actor searches for during a breach 




Malware
Software designed to harm devices or networks 

Some of the most common types of malware attacks today include:

Virus
Malicious code written to interfere with computer operations and cause damage to data and software
Attaches itself to a software or document then spreads itself to one or more computers in a network
A virus must be initiated by a user (e.g. threat actor), who transmits the virus via a malicious attachment or file download. 
When someone opens the malicious attachment or download, the virus hides itself in other files in the now-infected systems. 
When the infected files are opened, it allows the virus to insert its own code to damage and/or destroy data in the system

Worms
Malware that self-replicates, spreading across the network and infecting computers
In contrast to a virus, a worm does not need to be downloaded by a user
Instead, it self-replicates and spreads from an already infected computer to other devices on the same network

Ransomware
A malicious attack is where threat actors encrypt an organization’s data and demand payment to restore access. 

Spyware
Malware that is used to gather and sell information without consent. 
Spyware can be used to access devices
This allows threat actors to collect personal data, such as private emails, texts, voice and image recordings, and locations 

Password Attack
An attempt to access password-secured devices, systems, networks, or data. 
Types password attacks:
Brute force
Uses trial and error to crack passwords
Rainbow table
Uses a special table to crack the password hashes in a database

Phishing
The use of digital communications to trick people into revealing sensitive data or deploying malicious software

Some of the common types of phishing attacks today:

Business Email Compromise (BEC)
A threat actor sends an email message that seems to be from a known source to make a seemingly legitimate request for information, in order to obtain a financial advantage

Spear Phishing
A malicious email attack that targets a specific user or group of users
The email seems to originate from a trusted source

Whaling 
A form of spear phishing
Threat actors target company executives to gain access to sensitive data

Vishing
The exploitation of electronic voice communication to obtain sensitive information or to impersonate a known source

Smishing
The use of text messages to trick users, in order to obtain sensitive information or to impersonate a known user 


Social Engineering
A manipulation technique that exploits human error to gain private information, access, or valuables
Human error is usually a result of trusting someone without question
It is the mission of a threat actor, acting as a social engineer, to create an environment of false trust and lies to exploit as many people as possible

Some of the common types of Social Engineering attacks today include:

Social media phishing
A threat actor collects detailed information about their target from social media sites. Then, they initiate an attack
Water hole attack
	A threat actor attacks a website frequently visited by a specific group of users
USB baiting 
A threat actor strategically leaves a malware USB stick for an employee to find and install, to unknowingly infect a network
Physical social engineering
A threat actor impersonates an employee, customer, or vendor to obtain unauthorized access to a physical location 

Reasons why Social Engineering attacks are efficient include:
Authority
Threat actors impersonate individuals with power. This is because people, in general, have been conditioned to respect and follow authority figures. 
Intimidation
Threat actors use bullying tactics. This includes persuading and intimidating victims into doing what they’re told. 
Consensus/ Social Proof
Because people sometimes do things that they believe many others are doing, threat actors use other’s trust to pretend they are legitimate. 
For example, a threat actor might try to gain access to private data by telling an employee that other people at the company have given them access to that data in the past. 
Scarcity
A tactic used to imply that goods or services are in limited supply. 
Familiarity
Threat actors establish a fake emotional connection with users that can be exploited.  
Trust
Threat actors establish an emotional relationship with users that can be exploited over time. They use this relationship to develop trust and gain personal information.
Urgency
A threat actor persuades others to respond quickly and without questioning.

Physical Attack
Security incident that affects not only digital but also physical environments where the incident is deployed
 
Some form of physical attacks:
Malicious USB cable
Malicious flash drive
Card cloning and skimming

Adversarial Artificial Intelligence
A technique that manipulates AI and machine learning technology to conduct attacks more efficiently. 
Falls under both the communication and network security and the identity and access management domains. 

Supply-chain Attack
Targets systems, applications, hardware, and/or software to locate a vulnerability where malware can be deployed. 
Because every item sold undergoes a process that involves third parties, this means that a security breach can occur at any point in the supply chain. 
These attacks are costly because they can affect multiple organizations and the individuals who work for them. 
Supply-chain attacks can fall under several domains, including but not limited to the security and risk management, security architecture and engineering, and security operations domains. 

Cryptographic Attack
Affects secure forms of communication between a sender and the intended recipient. 
Fall under the communication and network security domain 

Some forms of cryptographic attacks:
Birthday
Collision
Downgrade

The Morris worm helped shape the security industry because it led to the development of computer emergency response teams, now commonly referred to as computer security incident response teams (CSIRTs). 
Brain viruses spread globally within a couple of months due to users inserting a disk into their computers that was meant to track illegal copies of medical software. 

CISSP SECURITY DOMAINS
Helps an organization and its security team fortify against and prepare for a data breach. 
Data breaches range from simple to complex and fall under one or more domains. 

8 CISSP Security Domains
Security & Risk Management
Defines security goals and objectives, risk mitigation, compliance, business continuity, and law
E.g. make sure the company has policies in place that follow government rules
Asset Security
Secures digital and physical assets. It’s also related to the storage, maintenance, retention, and destruction of data. 
Security Architecture & Engineering
Optimizes data security by ensuring effective tools, systems, and processes are in place. 
E.g. incoming and outgoing network traffic. 
Communications & Network Security
Manages and secures physical networks and wireless communications. 
E.g. creating network policies
Identity & Access Management
Keeps data source, by ensuring users follow established policies to control and manage physical assets, like office spaces, and logical assets, such as networks and applications. 
E.g. setting up employee keycards
Security Assessment & Testing
Conducting security control testing, collecting and analyzing data, and conducting security audits to monitor for risks, threats, and vulnerabilities. 
E.g. Conducting audits of user permissions to make sure that users have the correct user access and no unauthorized users have access to certain data
Security Operations
Conducting investigations and implementing preventative measures. 
E.g. if an unauthorized device gains access to the company's networks, an analyst will need to follow the policies and procedures to stop the device. 
Software Development Security
Uses secure coding practices, which are a set of recommended guidelines that are used to create secure applications and services. 
Work with software development teams to ensure that security practices are incorporated into the software development life cycle
E.g. advice on the password policies or ensuring that the user data is properly secured and managed.


Threat Actor Types

Advanced persistent threats (APTs)
Have significant expertise accessing an organization’s network without authorization. 
Tens to research their targets (e.g. large corporations or government entities) in advance and can remain undetected for an extended period of time. 
Their intentions and motivations can include:
Damaging critical infrastructure, such as the power grid and natural resources
Gaining access to intellectual property, such as trade secrets and patents

Insider Threats
Abuse their authorized access to obtain data that may harm an organization. 
Their intentions and motivations can include:
Sabotage
Corruption
Espionage
Unauthorized data access or leaks

Hacktivists
Driven by a political agenda. 
They abuse digital technology to accomplish their goals, which may include:
Demonstrations
Propaganda
Social change campaigns
Fame

Hacker Types
A hacker is a person who uses computers to gain access to computer systems, networks, or data. 

3 Main categories of hackers:
Ethical hackers/ Authorized hackers
They follow a code of ethics and adhere to the law to conduct risk evaluations 
They are motivated to safeguard people and organizations from malicious threat actors
Researches/ Semi-authorized hackers
They search for vulnerabilities but don’t take advantage of the vulnerabilities they find
Unethical hackers/ Unauthorized hackers
They are malicious threat actors who do not follow or respect the law
Their goal is to collect and sell confidential data for financial gain. 



Threat actor goals include:
To learn and enhance their skills
To seek revenge
To exploit security weaknesses by using existing malware, programming scripts, and other tactics. 

Steps to manage risks 
Identify the company’s critical assets and risks 
Implement the necessary frameworks and controls

Compliance 
Process of adhering to internal standards and external regulations.

Security Frameworks
Guidelines are used for building plans to help mitigate risks and threats to data and privacy. 
Frameworks allow analysts to work alongside other members of the security team to document, implement, and use implement, and use the policies and procedures that have been created.
It's essential for an entry-level analyst to understand this process because it directly affects the work they do and how they collaborate with others

Purpose of Security Frameworks
Protecting Personal Identifiable Information (PII)
Securing financial information
Identifying security weaknesses
Managing organizational risks
Aligning security with business goals

Components of Frameworks
Identifying and documenting security goals. E.g. a company aligning its security goal with the HIPPA. May be asked to document areas that are not compliant with HIPAA regulations
Setting guidelines to achieve security goals. E.g. developing new policies for individual users. 
Implementing strong security processes. E.g. verifying user requests for data
Monitoring and communicating results. E.g. monitoring the company network and reporting suspicious actions  

Security Controls
Safeguards are designed to reduce specific security risks. 
For example, your company may have a guideline that requires all employees to complete privacy training to reduce the risk of data breaches. 
As a security analyst, you may use a software tool to automatically assign and track which employees have completed this training.

Security frameworks and controls are vital to managing security for all types of organizations and ensuring that everyone is doing their part to maintain a low level of risk.







CIA TRIAD
A foundational model that helps inform how organizations consider risk when setting up systems and security policies. 
Confidentiality
Only authorized users can access specific assets or data. 
For example, strict access controls that define who should and should not have access to data, must be put in place to ensure confidential data remains safe.
Integrity
Data is correct, authentic, and reliable. 
To maintain integrity, security professionals can use a form of data protection like encryption to safeguard data from being tampered with.
Availability
Data is accessible to those who are authorized to access it

Asset
An item perceived as having value to an organization

Value
Determined by the cost associated with the asset in question.

Key goals for security professionals 
Managing and mitigating risks
Protecting an organization's assets from threat actors 
Understanding the different motives a threat actor may have
Identifying your organization's most valuable assets is

Security Architecture
A type of security design composed of multiple components, such as tools and processes, that are used to protect an organization from risks and external threats

Security Governance
Practices that help support, define, and direct security efforts of an organization

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
U.S.-based agency that develops multiple voluntary compliance frameworks that organizations worldwide can use to help manage risk. 
The more aligned an organization is with compliance, the lower the risk.
Specifications and guidelines can change depending on the type of organization you work for.

NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF)
A voluntary framework that consists of standards, guidelines, and best practices to manage cybersecurity risk

The Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP®)
U.S. federal government program that standardizes security assessment, authorization, monitoring, and handling of cloud services and product offerings. 
Its purpose is to provide consistency across the government sector and third-party cloud providers. 

Center for Internet Security (CIS®)
CIS is a nonprofit with multiple areas of emphasis. 
It provides a set of controls that can be used to safeguard systems and networks against attacks. Its purpose is to help organizations establish a better plan of defense.
CIS also provides actionable controls that security professionals may follow if a security incident occurs. 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
GDPR is a European Union (E.U.) general data regulation that protects the processing of E.U. residents’ data and their right to privacy in and out of E.U. territory.

Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)
PCI DSS is an international security standard meant to ensure that organizations storing, accepting, processing, and transmitting credit card information do so in a secure environment. 
The objective of this compliance standard is to reduce credit card fraud. 

The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
HIPAA is a U.S. federal law established in 1996 to protect patient's health information. 

System and Organizations Controls (SOC type 1, SOC type 2)
They are used to assess an organization’s financial compliance and levels of risk. They also cover confidentiality, privacy, integrity, availability, security, and overall data safety. Control failures in these areas can lead to fraud.
The SOC1 and SOC2 are a series of reports that focus on an organization's user access policies at different organizational levels such as: 
Associate
Supervisor
Manager
Executive
Vendor 
Others 




Ethics in Cybersecurity

Security Ethics
Guidelines for making appropriate decisions as a security professional
Having a strong sense of ethics can guide your decisions to ensure that the proper processes and procedures are followed to mitigate these continually evolving risks.








IMPORTANT CYBERSECURITY TOOLS

Log
A record of events that occur within an organization’s systems
Examples of security-related logs include records of employees signing into their computers or accessing web-based services. 
Logs help security professionals identify vulnerabilities and potential security breaches.

Security Information and Event Management tools(SIEM tools)
Tool is an application that collects and analyzes log data to monitor critical activities in an organization
SIEM tools collect real-time, or instant, information, and allow security analysts to identify potential breaches as they happen.
SIEM tools reduce the amount of data an analyst must review by providing alerts for specific types of risks and threats
SIEMs in general, collect data from multiple places, then analyze and filter that data to allow security teams to prevent and quickly react to potential security threats.

As a security analyst, you may find yourself using SIEM tools to analyze filtered events and patterns, perform incident analysis, or proactively search for threats. 
Depending on your organization's SIEM setup and risk focus, the tools and how they function may differ, but ultimately, they are all used to mitigate risk.

Commonly used SIEM tools
Splunk
A data analysis platform, and Splunk Enterprise provides SIEM solutions. Splunk Enterprise is a self-hosted tool used to retain, analyze, and search an organization's log data
Google's Chronicle
A cloud-native SIEM tool that stores security data for search and analysis. 
Cloud-native means that Chronicle allows for fast delivery of new features.

Playbook
a manual that provides details about any operational action, such as how to respond to an incident
Guides analysts in how to handle a security incident before, during, and after it has occurred. 

Playbooks can pertain to security or compliance reviews, access management, and many other organizational tasks that require a documented process from beginning to end.

Network Protocol Analyzer(packet sniffer) 
A packet sniffer is a tool designed to capture and analyze data traffic within a network. Common network protocol analyzers include tcpdump and Wireshark.
This means that the tool keeps a record of all the data that a computer within an organization's network encounters

Dashboard
A tool used to visually communicate information or data

Programming
Used to create a specific set of instructions for a computer to execute tasks
Allows analysts to complete repetitive tasks and processes with a high degree of accuracy and efficiency. It Also helps reduce the risk of human error, and can save hours or days compared to performing the work manually. 

Operating Systems
The interface between computer hardware and the user

Linux
An open-source operating system
Relies on a command line as the primary user interface
Linux can be used to examine logs to better understand what's occurring in a system. 
For example, you might find yourself using commands to review an error log when investigating uncommonly high network traffic.

Structured Query Language (SQL)
Programming language used to create, interact with, and request information from a database. 
security analyst would use SQL to filter through the data points to retrieve specific information.

Database
An organized collection of information or data

Data Point
A specific piece of information. 

Web Vulnerability
A unique flaw in a web application that a threat actor could exploit by using malicious code or behavior, to allow unauthorized access, data theft, and malware deployment.

Antivirus Software
A software program used to prevent, detect, and eliminate malware and viruses



Intrusion Detection System (IDS) 
An application that monitors system activity and alerts on possible intrusions. 
The system scans and analyzes network packets, which carry small amounts of data through a network. 
The small amount of data makes the detection process easier for an IDS to identify potential threats to sensitive data. 
Other occurrences an IDS might detect can include theft and unauthorized access.

Encryption 
Makes data unreadable and difficult to decode for an unauthorized user; its main goal is to ensure the confidentiality of private data.

Cryptographic Encoding 
converting plaintext into secure ciphertext. 

Plaintext
Unencrypted information 

Secure Ciphertext 
The result of encryption  

Encoding vs Encryption
Encoding is for maintaining data usability and can be reversed by employing the same algorithm that encoded the content, i.e. no key is used. 
Encryption is for maintaining data confidentiality and requires the use of a key (kept secret) in order to return to plaintext.

Penetration testing, also called pen testing
The act of participating in a simulated attack helps identify vulnerabilities in systems, networks, websites, applications, and processes.
It is a thorough risk assessment that can evaluate and identify external and internal threats as well as weaknesses.

