Play It Safe: Manage Security Risks

Security Posture
An Organization’s ability to manage its defense of critical assets and data, and react to change

CISSP SECURITY DOMAINS

Security and Risk Management
Focused on:
Defining security goals and objectives → Organizations can reduce risks to critical assets and data like PII
Risk mitigation: having the right procedures and rules in place to quickly reduce the impact of a risk like a breach
Compliance → the primary method used to develop an organization's internal security policies, regulatory requirements, and independent standards
Business Continuity Plans → an organization's ability to maintain their everyday productivity by establishing risk disaster recovery plans.
Legal Regulations → following rules and expectations for ethical behavior to minimize negligence, abuse, or fraud.
Professional and organizational ethics

Asset Security 
Focused on securing digital and physical assets. 
It’s also related to the storage, maintenance, retention, and destruction of data.
 
Security Architecture and Engineering
Focused on optimizing data security by ensuring effective tools, systems, and processes are in place to protect an organization’s assets and data
Shared responsibility → all individuals within an organization take an active role in lowering risk and maintaining both physical and virtual security. 
Other design principles include: threat modeling, least privilege, defense in depth, fail securely,  separation of duties, keep it simple, zero trust, and trust but verify

Communication and Network Security
Focused on managing and securing physical networks and wireless communications

Identity and Access Management (IAM)
Focused on access and authorization to keep data secure, by making sure users follow established policies to control and manage assets. 
IAM uses what is referred to as the principle of least privilege, which is the concept of granting only the minimal access and authorization required to complete a task
Component of IAM
Identification → when a user verifies who they are by providing a user name, an access card, or biometric data such as a fingerprint.
Authentication → the verification process to prove a person's identity, such as entering a password or PIN
Authorization → takes place after a user's identity has been confirmed and relates to their level of access, which depends on the role in the organization.
Accountability → refers to monitoring and recording user actions, like login attempts, to prove systems and data are used properly.

Security Assessment and Testing
Focused on identifying and mitigating risks, threats, and vulnerabilities. 
Security assessments help organizations determine whether their internal systems are secure or at risk. Organizations might employ penetration testers, often referred to as “pen testers,” to find vulnerabilities that could be exploited by a threat actor. 
Security control testing can help an organization identify new and better ways to mitigate threats, risks, and vulnerabilities. 
This involves examining organizational goals and objectives, and evaluating if the controls being used actually achieve those goals. 
Collecting and analyzing security data regularly also helps prevent threats and risks to the organization.
Analysts might use security control testing evaluations and security assessment reports to improve existing controls or implement new controls. 
An example of implementing a new control could be requiring the use of multi-factor authentication to better protect the organization from potential threats and risks.

Security Operations
Focused on conducting investigations and implementing preventative measures. Investigations begin once a security incident has been identified. 
This process requires a heightened sense of urgency in order to minimize potential risks to the organization. 
If there is an active attack, mitigating the attack and preventing it from escalating further is essential for ensuring that private information is protected from threat actors.
Once the threat has been neutralized, the collection of digital and physical evidence to conduct a forensic investigation will begin. 
A digital forensic investigation must take place to identify when, how, and why the breach occurred. This helps security teams determine areas for improvement and preventative measures that can be taken to mitigate future attacks.
Key strategies, processes, and tools for Security Operations:
	Training
	Reporting and documentation
	Intrusion detection and prevention
	SIEM tools
	Log Management
	Incident Management
	Playbooks
	Post-breach forensics
	Reflecting on Lessons Learned
Security Development Security
Focuses on using secure coding practices
Secure coding practices are recommended guidelines that are used to create secure applications and services. 
By ensuring that each phase of the software development lifecycle undergoes security reviews, security can be fully integrated into the software product.
For example, performing a secure design review during the design phase, secure code reviews during the development and testing phases, and penetration testing during the deployment and implementation phase ensures that security is embedded into the software product at every step. This keeps software secure and sensitive data protected and mitigates unnecessary risks to an organization.

Social Engineering
A manipulation technique that exploits human error to gain private information, access, or vulnerabilities. 

Threat
Any circumstance or event that can negatively impact assets

Risk
The likelihood of a threat occurring
Anything that can impact the confidentiality, integrity, or vulnerability of an asset. 
Risk is categorized into low, medium, or high 

Low-risk Asset
Information that would not harm the organization’s reputation or ongoing operations, and would not cause financial damage if compromised. 
This includes public information such as website content, or published research data.

Medium-risk Asset
Might include information that's not available to the public and may cause some damage to the organization's finances, reputation, or ongoing operations.
For example, the early release of a company's quarterly earnings could impact the value of its stock.

High-risk Asset
Any information protected by regulations or laws, which if compromised, would have a severe negative impact on an organization's finances, ongoing operations, or reputation. 
This could include leaked assets with SPII, PII, or intellectual property.

Vulnerability
A weakness that can be exploited by a threat
Examples of vulnerabilities include an outdated firewall, software, or application; weak passwords; or unprotected confidential data. 
People can also be considered vulnerable. People's actions can significantly affect an organization's internal network. Whether it's a client, external vendor, or employee, maintaining security must be a united effort.

Ransomware
Malicious attacks where threat actors encrypt an organization’s data and demand payment to restore access
Once ransomware is deployed by an attacker, it can:
Freeze network systems
Leave devices unusable
Encrypt, or lock confidential data, making devices inaccessible.







Risk Management Framework (RMF)

Prepare 
Activities that are necessary to manage security and privacy risks before a breach occurs
Use this step to monitor for risks and identify controls that can be used to reduce those risks.

Categorize
Used to develop risk management processes and tasks
Security professionals then use those processes and develop tasks by thinking about how the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of systems and information can be impacted by risk.
Understand how to follow the processes established by your organization to reduce risks to critical assets, such as private customer information.

Select
To choose, customize, and capture documentation of the controls that protect an organization. 
An example of the select step would be keeping a playbook up-to-date or helping to manage other documentation that allows you and your team to address issues more efficiently.

Implement security and privacy plans
Having good plans in place is essential for minimizing the impact of ongoing security risks. 
For example, if you notice a pattern of employees constantly needing password resets, implementing a change to password requirements may help solve this issue.

Access
To determine if established controls are implemented correctly. 
An organization always wants to operate as efficiently as possible. 
So it's essential to take the time to analyze whether the implemented protocols, procedures, and controls that are in place are meeting organizational needs. 
During this step, analysts identify potential weaknesses and determine whether the organization's tools, procedures, controls, and protocols should be changed to better manage potential risks.

Authorize
Being accountable for the security and privacy risks that may exist in an organization. 
As an analyst, the authorization step could involve generating reports, developing plans of action, and establishing project milestones that are aligned with your organization's security goals.

Monitor
To be aware of how systems are operating. 
Assessing and maintaining technical operations are tasks that analysts complete daily. 
Part of maintaining a low level of risk for an organization is knowing how the current systems support the organization's security goals. 
If the systems in place don't meet those goals, changes may be needed.







Common strategies used to manage risks include:

Acceptance: Accepting a risk to avoid disrupting business continuity

Avoidance: Creating a plan to avoid the risk altogether

Transference: Transferring risk to a third party to manage

Mitigation: Lessening the impact of a known risk

Vulnerability 
A weakness that can be exploited by a threat. Therefore, organizations need to regularly inspect for vulnerabilities within their systems. 

Some vulnerabilities include:

ProxyLogon
A pre-authenticated vulnerability that affects the Microsoft Exchange server. 
This means a threat actor can complete a user authentication process to deploy malicious code from a remote location.

ZeroLogon
A vulnerability in Microsoft’s Netlogon authentication protocol. 
An authentication protocol is a way to verify a person's identity. 
Netlogon is a service that ensures a user’s identity before allowing access to a website's location.

Log4Shell
Allows attackers to run Java code on someone else’s computer or leak sensitive information. 
It does this by enabling a remote attacker to take control of devices connected to the internet and run malicious code.

PetitPotam
Affects Windows New Technology Local Area Network (LAN) Manager (NTLM). 
It is a theft technique that allows a LAN-based attacker to initiate an authentication request.

Security logging and monitoring failures
Insufficient logging and monitoring capabilities result in attackers exploiting vulnerabilities without the organization knowing it

Server-side request forgery
Allows attackers to manipulate a server-side application into accessing and updating backend resources. It can also allow threat actors to steal data.


Security Frameworks
Guidelines used for building plans to help mitigate risk and threats to data and privacy. 
Frameworks can be used to create plans that increase employee awareness and educate them about how they can protect the organization, their co-workers, and themselves. 
Educating employees about existing security challenges is essential for minimizing the possibility of a breach.

Security Controls
Safeguards designed to reduce specific security risks

Types of Security Controls
Encryption
Process of converting data from a readable format to an encoded format
Typically, encryption involves converting data from plaintext to ciphertext. 
Ciphertext is the raw, encoded message that's unreadable to humans and computers. 
Ciphertext data cannot be read until it's been decrypted into its original plaintext form
Authentication
The process of verifying who someone or something is. 
A real-world example of authentication is logging into a website with your username and password.
Another example: multi-factor authentication
Authorization 
Refers to the concept of granting access to specific resources within a system.
Authorization is used to verify that a person has permission to access a resource.

Cyber Threat Framework (CTF)
Provides “a common language for describing and communicating information about cyber threat activity.
By providing a common language to communicate information about threat activity, the CTF helps cybersecurity professionals analyze and share information more efficiently. 
This allows organizations to improve their response to the constantly evolving cybersecurity landscape and threat actors' many tactics and techniques.

International Organization for Standardization/International Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC) 27001
A Family of standards enables organizations of all sectors and sizes to manage the security of assets, such as financial information, intellectual property, employee data, and information entrusted to third parties. 
This framework outlines requirements for an information security management system, best practices, and controls that support an organization’s ability to manage risks.

CIA Triad
A foundational security model used to set up security policies and systems. 
Confidentiality → only authorized users can access specific assets or data
Integrity → the data is correct, authentic, and reliable
Availability → data is accessible to those who are authorized to access it. 

National Institute of Standards and Technology Framework (NIST Framework)

NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF)
A voluntary framework that consists of standards, guidelines, and best practices to manage cybersecurity risk
The core functions of the NIST CSF provide specific guidance and direction for security professionals. 
This framework is used to develop plans to handle an incident appropriately and quickly to lower risk, protect an organization against a threat, and mitigate any potential vulnerabilities. 




CSF Core Functions
Identify
Related to the management of cybersecurity risk and its effect on an organization's people and assets. For example, as a security analyst, you may be asked to monitor systems and devices in your organization's internal network to identify potential security issues

Protect
The strategy used to protect an organization through the implementation of policies, procedures, training, and tools that help mitigate cybersecurity threats.
For example, as a security analyst, you and your team might encounter new and unfamiliar threats and attacks. For this reason, studying historical data and making improvements to policies and procedures is essential.

Detect
Identifying potential security incidents and improving monitoring capabilities to increase the speed and efficiency of detections. 
For example, as an analyst, you might be asked to review a new security tool's setup to make sure it's flagging low, medium, or high risk, and then alerting the security team about any potential threats or incidents.

Respond
Making sure that the proper procedures are used to contain, neutralize, and analyze security incidents, and implement improvements to the security process.
As an analyst, you could be working with a team to collect and organize data to document an incident and suggest improvements to processes to prevent the incident from happening again.

Recover
The process of returning affected systems back to normal operation.
For example, as an entry-level security analyst, you might work with your security team to restore systems, data, and assets, such as financial or legal files, that have been affected by an incident like a breach.

NIST S.P. 800-53
A unified framework for protecting the security of information systems within the federal government 


Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) Security Principles

Minimize the attack surface area
An attack surface refers to all the potential vulnerabilities that a threat actor could exploit, like attack vectors, which are pathways attackers use to penetrate security defenses. 
Examples of common attack vectors are phishing emails and weak passwords. 
To minimize the attack surface and avoid incidents from these types of vectors, security teams might disable software features, restrict who can access certain assets, or establish more complex password requirements.
The principle of least privilege means making sure that users have the least amount of access required to perform their everyday tasks. 
The main reason for limiting access to organizational information and resources is to reduce the amount of damage a security breach could cause. 
For example, as an entry-level analyst, you may have access to log data, but may not have access to change user permissions. Therefore, if a threat actor compromises your credentials, they'll only be able to gain limited access to digital or physical assets, which may not be enough for them to deploy their intended attack.

Defense in depth
Defense in depth means that an organization should have multiple security controls that address risks and threats in different ways. 
One example of a security control is multi-factor authentication, or MFA, which requires users to take an additional step beyond simply entering their username and password to gain access to an application.
Other controls include firewalls, intrusion detection systems, and permission settings that can be used to create multiple points of defense, a threat actor must get through to breach an organization.

Separation of duties
Can be used to prevent individuals from carrying out fraudulent or illegal activities. This principle means that no one should be given so many privileges that they can misuse the system. For example, the person in a company who signs the paychecks shouldn't also be the person who prepares them.

Keep security simple 
when implementing security controls, unnecessarily complicated solutions should be avoided because they can become unmanageable. 
The more complex the security controls are, the harder it is for people to work collaboratively.

 Fix security issues correctly
Technology is a great tool, but can also present challenges. 
When a security incident occurs, security professionals are expected to identify the root cause quickly. 
From there, it's important to correct any identified vulnerabilities and conduct tests to ensure that repairs are successful.
An example of an issue is a weak password to access an organization's wifi because it could lead to a breach. To fix this type of security issue, stricter password policies could be put in place.

Establish secure defaults
This principle means that the optimal security state of an application is also its default state for users; it should take extra work to make the application insecure. 

Fail securely
Means that when a control fails or stops, it should do so by defaulting to its most secure option. For example, when a firewall fails it should simply close all connections and block all new ones, rather than start accepting everything.

Don’t trust services
Many organizations work with third-party partners. These outside partners often have different security policies than the organization does. And the organization shouldn’t explicitly trust that their partners’ systems are secure. For example, if a third-party vendor tracks reward points for airline customers, the airline should ensure that the balance is accurate before sharing that information with their customers.

Avoid security by obscurity
The security of key systems should not rely on keeping details hidden. Consider the following example from OWASP (2016):

The security of an application should not rely on keeping the source code secret. Its security should rely upon many other factors, including reasonable password policies, defense in depth, business transaction limits, solid network architecture, and fraud and audit controls.


Security Audit
A review of an organization’s security controls, policies, and procudures againt a set of expectation
Audits are an opportunity to determine what security measures an organization has in place and what areas need to be improved to achieve the organization's desired security posture.

Types of Security Audits
External 
	E.g. third party vendors
Internal
Internal security audits are used to help improve an organization's security posture and help organizations avoid fines from governing agencies due to a lack of compliance. 
Internal security audits help security teams 
identify organizational risk
assess controls
correct compliance issues

Factors that affect Audits
Industry type
Organization size
Ties to the applicable government regulations
A business’s geographical location
A business decision to adhere to a specific regulatory compliance


Common elements of internal audits
Establishing the scope and goals
Scope refers to the specific criteria of an internal security audit
Scope requires organizations to identify people, assets, policies, procedures, and technologies that might impact an organization's security posture. 
Goals are an outline of the organization's security objectives, or what they want to achieve in order to improve their security posture.
For example: List assets that will be assessed (e.g., firewalls are configured correctly, PII is secure, physical assets are locked, etc.) 
Conduting a risk assessment
Focused on identifying potential threats, risks, and vulnerabilities. This helps organizations consider what security measures should be implemented and monitored to ensure the safety of assets

Completing a controls assessment
Involves closely reviewing an organization's existing assets, then evaluating potential risks to those assets, to ensure internal controls and processes are effective. 
To do this, entry-level analysts might be tasked with classifying controls into the following categories: 
Administrative controls →  related to the human component of cybersecurity. They include policies and procedures that define how an organization manages data, such as the implementation of password policies.

Technical Controls → hardware and software solutions used to protect assets, such as the use of intrusion detection systems, or IDS's, and encryption.

Physical Controls → refer to measures put in place to prevent physical access to protected assets, such as surveillance cameras and locks.

Assessing compliance
Laws that organizations must follow to ensure private data remains secure.
In this example, the organization conducts business in the European Union and accepts credit card payments. So they need to adhere to the GDPR and Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard, or PCI DSS.

Communication results
This type of communication summarizes the scope and goals of the audit. 
Then, it lists existing risks and notes how quickly those risks need to be addressed. 
Additionally, it identifies compliance regulations the organization needs to adhere to and provides recommendations for improving the organization's security posture.


Attack vectors: The pathways attackers use to penetrate security defenses











Log
A record of events that occur within an organization’s systems and networks
By monitoring logs, like the one shown here, security teams can identify vulnerabilities and potential data breaches. 
Understanding logs is important because SIEM tools rely on logs to monitor systems and detect security threats.

Common log sources:
Firewall logs
A record of attempted or established connections for incoming traffic from the internet. 
It also includes outbound requests to the internet from within the network.

Network logs
Record of all computers and devices that enter and leave the network. 
It also records connections between devices and services on the network.

Server logs
 A record of events related to services such as websites, emails, or file shares. 
It includes actions such as login, password, and username requests.


Security Information and Event Management tool ( or SIEM tool)
An application that collects and analyzes log data to monitor critical activities in an organization. 
It provides real-time visibility, event monitoring and analysis, and automated alerts. 
It also stores all log data in a centralized location.
Because SIEM tools index and minimize the number of logs a security professional must manually review and analyze, they increase efficiency and save time.
But, SIEM tools must be configured and customized to meet each organization's unique security needs. 
As new threats and vulnerabilities emerge, organizations must continually customize their SIEM tools to ensure that threats are detected and quickly addressed.

SIEM tools can also be used to create dashboards. You might have encountered dashboards in an app on your phone or other device. They present information about your account or location in a format that's easy to understand.
For example, weather apps display data like temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and the forecast using charts, graphs, and other visual elements. This format makes it easy to quickly identify weather patterns and trends, so you can stay prepared and plan your day accordingly.
Just like weather apps help people make quick and informed decisions based on data, SIEM dashboards help security analysts quickly and easily access their organization's security information as charts, graphs, or tables.
In addition to providing a comprehensive summary of security-related data, SIEM dashboards also provide stakeholders with different metrics. 
SIEM dashboards can be customized to display specific metrics or other data that are relevant to different members in an organization. For example, a security analyst may create a dashboard that displays metrics for monitoring everyday business operations, like the volume of incoming and outgoing network traffic.
SIEM tools provide dashboards that help security professionals organize and focus their security efforts. This is important because it allows analysts to reduce risk by identifying, analyzing, and remediating the highest priority items in a timely manner. 


Different types of SIEM tools
Self-hosted
Require organizations to install, operate, and maintain the tool using their own physical infrastructure, such as server capacity. 
These applications are then managed and maintained by the organization's IT department, rather than a third party vendor. 
Self-hosted SIEM tools are ideal when an organization is required to maintain physical control over confidential data.

Cloud-hosted
Maintained and managed by the SIEM providers, making them accessible through the internet. Cloud-hosted SIEM tools are ideal for organizations that don't want to invest in creating and maintaining their own infrastructure.

Hybrid solution
Organizations might choose a hybrid SIEM solution to leverage the benefits of the cloud while also maintaining physical control over confidential data.

Examples of SIEM tools
Splunk Enterpise
Splunk is a data analysis platform and Splunk Enterprise provides SIEM solutions. Both allow you to review an organization's data on dashboards.
Splunk Enterprise is a self-hosted tool used to retain, analyze, and search an organization's log data to provide security information and alerts in real-time.

Splunk Cloud
A cloud-hosted tool used to collect, search, and monitor log data. 
Splunk Cloud is helpful for organizations running hybrid or cloud-only environments, where some or all of the organization's services are in the cloud.

Google’s Chronicle
A cloud-native tool designed to retain, analyze, and search data. 
Chronicle provides log monitoring, data analysis, and data collection. 
Cloud-native tools are specifically designed to take full advantage of cloud computing capabilities such as availability, flexibility, and scalability.
Help analysts monitor an organization’s logs, create filters and alerts, and track suspicious domain names. 
Allows you to collect and analyze log data according to: 
A specific asset
A domain name
A user
An IP address

Various Splunk dashboards and their purpuse
Security posture dashboard
It displays the last 24 hours of an organization’s notable security-related events and trends and allows security professionals to determine if security infrastructure and policies are performing as designed. 
Security analysts can use this dashboard to monitor and investigate potential threats in real time, such as suspicious network activity originating from a specific IP address.
 
Executive summary dashboard
Analyzes and monitors the overall health of the organization over time. 
This helps security teams improve security measures that reduce risk. 
Security analysts might use this dashboard to provide high-level insights to stakeholders, such as generating a summary of security incidents and trends over a specific period of time.

Incident review dashboard
Allows analysts to identify suspicious patterns that can occur in the event of an incident. 
It assists by highlighting higher risk items that need immediate review by an analyst. 
This dashboard can be very helpful because it provides a visual timeline of the events leading up to an incident.

Risk analysis dashboard
Helps analysts identify risk for each risk object (e.g., a specific user, a computer, or an IP address). 
It shows changes in risk-related activity or behavior, such as a user logging in outside of normal working hours or unusually high network traffic from a specific computer. 
A security analyst might use this dashboard to analyze the potential impact of vulnerabilities in critical assets, which helps analysts prioritize their risk mitigation efforts.

Google Chronicle dashboards and their purpose
Enterprise insights dashboard
Highlights recent alerts. 
It identifies suspicious domain names in logs, known as indicators of compromise (IOCs). 
Each result is labeled with a confidence score to indicate the likelihood of a threat. 
It also provides a severity level that indicates the significance of each threat to the organization. 
A security analyst might use this dashboard to monitor login or data access attempts related to a critical asset—like an application or system—from unusual locations or devices.

Data ingestion and health dashboard
shows the number of event logs, log sources, and success rates of data being processed into Chronicle. A security analyst might use this dashboard to ensure that log sources are correctly configured and that logs are received without error. 
This helps ensure that log related issues are addressed so that the security team has access to the log data they need.

IOC matches dashboard
Indicates the top threats, risks, and vulnerabilities to the organization. 
Security professionals use this dashboard to observe domain names, IP addresses, and device IOCs over time in order to identify trends. 
This information is then used to direct the security team’s focus to the highest priority threats. 
For example, security analysts can use this dashboard to search for additional activity associated with an alert, such as a suspicious user login from an unusual geographic location. 

Main dashboard 
Displays a high-level summary of information related to the organization’s data ingestion, alerting, and event activity over time. 
Security professionals can use this dashboard to access a timeline of security events—such as a spike in failed login attempts— to identify threat trends across log sources, devices, IP addresses, and physical locations.

Rule detections dashboard 
Provides statistics related to incidents with the highest occurrences, severities, and detections over time. 
Security analysts can use this dashboard to access a list of all the alerts triggered by a specific detection rule, such as a rule designed to alert whenever a user opens a known malicious attachment from an email. 
Analysts then use those statistics to help manage recurring incidents and establish mitigation tactics to reduce an organization's level of risk.

User sign in overview dashboard 
Provides information about user access behavior across the organization. 
Security analysts can use this dashboard to access a list of all user sign-in events to identify unusual user activity, such as a user signing in from multiple locations at the same time. 
This information is then used to help mitigate threats, risks, and vulnerabilities to user accounts and the organization’s applications.

Metrics 
Key technical attributes such as response time, availability, and failure rate, which are used to assess the performance of a software application.

Security orchestration, automation, and response (SOAR)
A collection of applications, tools, and workflows that uses automation to respond to security events.


Incident response
An organization’s quick attempt to identify an attack, contain the damage, and correct the effects of a security breach
