Network
A group of connected devices
E.g. laptops, cellphones, printers

Local Area Network(or LAN)
Spans a small area like an office building, a school, or a home. 
For example, when a personal device like your cell phone or tablet connects to the WIFI in your house, they form a LAN. The LAN then connects to the internet.

Wide Area Network( or WAN) 
Spans a large geographical area like a city, state, or country. You can think of the internet as one big WAN. An employee of a company in San Francisco can communicate and share resources with another employee in Dublin, Ireland over the WAN.

Network Security
Important because it ensures that newwork systems are safe and resilient to be able to protect user data against threats and attacks

Network Traffic Analysis
Looking at network across various applications and network layers and seeing what the traffic is doing and find any vulnarabilities and concerns.

Network Devices
Devices that maintain information and services for users of a network. 
These devices connect over wired and wireless connections. 
After establishing a connection to the network, the devices send data packets. The data packets provide information about the source and the destination of the data.

Hub
A network device that broadcasts information to ever device on the network

Switch
A device that makes connections between specific devices on a network by sending and receiving data between them. 
More secure than hubs

Router
A network device that connects multiple networks together

If a computer in one network wants to send information to a tablet on another network, then the information will be transferred as follows: 
The information travels from the computer to the router. 
The router reads the destination address, and forwards the data to the intended network's router.
The receiving router directs that information to the tablet.

Modem
A device that connects your router to the internet and brings internet access to the LAN

If a computer from one network wants to send information to a device on a network in a different geographic location, it would be transferred as follows:
The computer would send information to the router. 
tThe router would then transfer the information through the modem to the internet. 
The intended recipient's modem receives the information, and transfers it to the router. 
Finally, the recipient's router forwards that information to the destination device.

Virtualization tools
Pieces of software that perform network operations. 
Virtualization tools carry out operations that would normally be completed by a hub, switch, router, or modem, and they are offered by Cloud service providers. 
These tools provide opportunities for cost savings and scalability. You'll learn more about them later in the certificate program.

Firewall
A network security device that monitors traffic to or from your network. 
Firewalls can also restrict specific incoming and outgoing network traffic. 
The organization configures the security rules. 
Firewalls often reside between the secured and controlled internal network and the untrusted network resources outside the organization, such as the internet.

Servers 
Provide a service for other devices on the network. The devices that connect to a server are called clients.
The following graphic outlines this model, which is called the client-server model. 
In this model, clients send requests to the server for information and services. 
The server performs the requests for the clients. 
Common examples include DNS servers that perform domain name lookups for internet sites, file servers that store and retrieve files from a database, and corporate mail servers that organize mail for a company. 


Wireless Access Point 
Sends and receives digital signals over radio waves creating a wireless network. Devices with wireless adapters connect to the access point using Wi-Fi. Wi-Fi refers to a set of standards that are used by network devices to communicate wirelessly.




Network Diagrams 
Topographical maps that show the devices on the network and how they connect. 
Allow network administrators and security personnel to imagine the architecture and design of their organization’s private network.

Cloud Computing
The practice of using remote servers, applications, and network services that are hosted on the internet instead of on local physical devices.
Cloud providers offer an alternative to traditional on-premise networks, and allow organizations to have the benefits of the traditional network without storing the devices and managing the network on their own.

Cloud Network 
A collection of servers or computers that stores resources and data in a remote data center that can be accessed via the internet.
 Because companies don't house the servers at their physical location, these servers are referred to as being "in the cloud”

Cloud Service Provider (CSP)
A company that offers cloud computing services. 
These companies own large data centers in locations around the globe that house millions of servers. 

CSPs provide three main categories of services:

Software as a service (SaaS) 
Software suites operated by the CSP that a company can use remotely without hosting the software. 

Infrastructure as a service (Iaas) 
The use of virtual computer components offered by the CSP. These include virtual containers and storage that are configured remotely through the CSP’s API or web console. 
Cloud-compute and storage services can be used to operate existing applications and other technology workloads without significant modifications. 
Existing applications can be modified to take advantage of the availability, performance, and security features that are unique to cloud provider services.

Platform as a service (PaaS) 
Tools that application developers can use to design custom applications for their company. 
Custom applications are designed and accessed in the cloud and used for a company’s specific business needs.

Software-defined networks (SDNs) 
Made up of virtual network devices and services. 
Just like CSPs provide virtual computers, many SDNs also provide virtual switches, routers, firewalls, and more.

Benefits of cloud computing and software-defined networks 
Reliablity
Cost
Scalability 


Data packet
A basic unit of information that travels from one device to another within a network. 
When data is sent from one device to another across a network, it is sent as a packet that contains information about where the packet is going, where it's coming from, and the content of the message.
A data packet is very similar to a physical letter
It contains a header that includes the internet protocol address, the IP address, and the media access control, or MAC, address of the destination device. 
It also includes a protocol number that tells the receiving device what to do with the information in the packet. 
Then there's the body of the packet, which contains the message that needs to be transmitted to the receiving device. 
Finally, at the end of the packet, there's a footer, similar to a signature on a letter, the footer signals to the receiving device that the packet is finished.

The movement of data packets across a network can provide an indication of how well the network is performing. Network performance can be measured by bandwidth.

Bandwidth 
The amount of data a device receives every second. 
You can calculate bandwidth by dividing the quantity of data by the time in seconds. 

Speed 
The rate at which data packets are received or downloaded. 

Security personnel are interested in network bandwidth and speed because if either are irregular, it could be an indication of an attack. 

Packet sniffing
The practice of capturing and inspecting data packets across the network.

Transmission Control Protocol (or TCP)
An internet communication protocol that allows two devices to form a connection and stream data. 
The protocol includes a set of instructions to organize data, so it can be sent across a network.
It also establishes a connection between two devices and makes sure that packets reach their appropriate destination.


Internet Protocol (or IP) 
Has a set of standards used for routing and addressing data packets as they travel between devices on a network. 
Included in the Internet Protocol (IP) is the IP address that functions as an address for each private network. 

Port 
A software-based location that organizes the sending and receiving of data between devices on a network. 
Ports divide network traffic into segments based on the service they will perform between two devices. 
The computers sending and receiving these data segments know how to prioritize and process these segments based on their port number.
This is like sending a letter to a friend who lives in an apartment building. The mail delivery person not only knows how to find the building, but they also know exactly where to go in the building to find the apartment number where your friend lives.

Port numbers 
Allow computers to split the network traffic and prioritize the operations they will perform with the data. 
Some common port numbers are: 
port 25 → used for e-mail
port 443 →used for secure internet communication, like HTTPS
port 20 → for large file transfers.

Transmission Control Protocol/ Internet Protocol model (or TCP/IP Model)
A framework used to visualize how data is organized and transmitted across the network
Standard model used for network communication.
Knowing how the TCP/IP model organizes network activity allows security professionals to monitor and secure against risks.

Layers of the TCP/IP Model
Network Access Layer
Deals with creation of data packets and their transmission across a network. 
This includes hardware devices connected to physical cables and switches that direct data to its destination.

Internet Layer
Where IP addresses are attached to data packets to indicate the location of the sender and receiver. The internet layer also focuses on how networks connect to each other. 
For example, data packets containing information that determine whether they will stay on the LAN or will be sent to a remote network, like the internet.

Transport Layer
Controls the flow of traffic across a network. 
These protocols permit or deny communication with other devices and include information about the status of the connection. 
Activities of this layer include error control, which ensures data is flowing smoothly across the network.

Application Layer
Protocols determine how the data packets will interact with receiving devices. 
Functions that are organized at application layer include file transfers and email services.
OSI Model
Standardized concept that describes the seven layers computers use to communicate and send data over the network. 
Network and security professionals often use this model to communicate with each other about potential sources of problems or security threats when they occur.

Layers of the OSI Model

Physical Layer
Corresponds to the physical hardware involved in network transmission. 
Hubs, modems, and the cables and wiring that connect them are all considered part of the physical layer.

Data link layer
Organizes sending and receiving data packets within a single network. The data link layer is home to switches on the local network and network interface cards on local devices.

Protocols like network control protocol (NCP), high-level data link control (HDLC), and synchronous data link control protocol (SDLC) are used at the data link layer.

Network layer
Oversees receiving the frames from the data link layer (layer 2) and delivers them to the intended destination. 
The intended destination can be found based on the address that resides in the frame of the data packets. 
Data packets allow communication between two networks. 
These packets include IP addresses that tell routers where to send them. They are routed from the sending network to the receiving network. 

Transport layer
Responsible for delivering data between devices. 
This layer also handles the speed of data transfer, flow of the transfer, and breaking data down into smaller segments to make them easier to transport. 
Segmentation is the process of dividing up a large data transmission into smaller pieces that can be processed by the receiving system. 
These segments need to be reassembled at their destination so they can be processed at the session layer (layer 5). 
The speed and rate of the transmission also has to match the connection speed of the destination system. 
TCP and UDP are transport layer protocols. 

Session layer
A session describes when a connection is established between two devices. 
An open session allows the devices to communicate with each other. 
Session layer protocols occur to keep the session open while data is being transferred and terminate the session once the transmission is complete. 

The session layer is also responsible for activities such as authentication, reconnection, and setting checkpoints during a data transfer. 
If a session is interrupted, checkpoints ensure that the transmission picks up at the last session checkpoint when the connection resumes. 
Sessions include a request and response between applications. 
Functions in the session layer respond to requests for service from processes in the presentation layer (layer 6) and send requests for services to the transport layer (layer 4).

Presentation layer
Functions at the presentation layer involve data translation and encryption for the network. 
This layer adds to and replaces data with formats that can be understood by applications (layer 7) on both sending and receiving systems. 
Formats at the user end may be different from those of the receiving system. 
Processes at the presentation layer require the use of a standardized format.

Some formatting functions that occur at layer 6 include encryption, compression, and confirmation that the character code set can be interpreted on the receiving system. 
One example of encryption that takes place at this layer is SSL, which encrypts data between web servers and browsers as part of websites with HTTPS.

Application layer
Includes processes that directly involve the everyday user. This layer includes all of the networking protocols that software applications use to connect a user to the internet. This characteristic is the identifying feature of the application layer—user connection to the network via applications and requests.
An example of a type of communication that happens at the application layer is using a web browser. The internet browser uses HTTP or HTTPS to send and receive information from the website server.

Internet Protocol (IP) address
A string of character that identifies the location of a device on the internet 
Each device on the internet has a unique IP address, just like every house on a street has its own mailing address
IP addresses can be either public or private.
Types of IP Addresses:
IP Version 4 (IPv4) → example 19.117.63.126. The maximum possible size of an IPv4 packet is 65,535 bytes
IP Version 6 (IPv6) → 684D:1111:222:3333:4444:5555:6:77

Fields within The header of an IPv4 packet contains:  

Version(VER)
This 4 bit component tells receiving devices what protocol the packet is using. 
The packet used in the illustration above is an IPv4 packet.

IP Header Length (HLEN or IHL)
HLEN is the packet’s header length. 
This value indicates where the packet header ends and the data segment begins. 

Type of Service (ToS)
Routers prioritize packets for delivery to maintain quality of service on the network. 
The ToS field provides the router with this information.

Total Length 
This field communicates the total length of the entire IP packet, including the header and data. The maximum size of an IPv4 packet is 65,535 bytes.

Identification
For IPv4 packets that are larger than 65, 535 bytes, the packets are divided, or fragmented, into smaller IP packets. 
The identification field provides a unique identifier for all the fragments of the original IP packet so that they can be reassembled once they reach their destination. 

Flags
Provides the routing device with more information about whether the original packet has been fragmented and if there are more fragments in transit.

Fragmentation Offset
The fragment offset field tells routing devices where in the original packet the fragment belongs.

Time to Live (TTL)
TTL prevents data packets from being forwarded by routers indefinitely. 
It contains a counter that is set by the source. 
The counter is decremented by one as it passes through each router along its path. 
When the TTL counter reaches zero, the router currently holding the packet will discard the packet and return an ICMP Time Exceeded error message to the sender. 

Protocol
The protocol field tells the receiving device which protocol will be used for the data portion of the packet.

Header Checksum
Used to detect corruption of the IP header in transit. Corrupted packets are discarded.

Source IP Address 
The source IP address is the IPv4 address of the sending device.

Destination IP Address
The destination IP address is the IPv4 address of the destination device.

Options
The options field allows for security options to be applied to the packet if the HLEN value is greater than five. 
The field communicates these options to the routing devices.



MAC Address
A unique alphanumeric identifier that is assigned to each physical device on a network
When a switch receives a data packet, it reads the MAC address of the destination device and maps it to a port. It then keeps this information in a MAC address table. 
Think of the MAC address table like an address book that the switch uses to direct data packets to the appropriate device.

Network protocols
A set of rules used by two or more devices on a network to describe the order of delivery and the structure of the data.

Categories of the Network Protocol 
Communication Protocols
Govern the exchange of information in network transmission. 
They dictate how the data is transmitted between devices and the timing of the communication. Includes TCP, UDP, HTTP, DNS

Management Protocols
Used for monitoring and managing activity on a network
They include: SNMP, ICMP

Security Protocols
Ensures that data is sent and received securely across a network
Use encryption to protect data in transit
Includes HTTPS, SFTP

Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
An internet communication protocol that allows two devices to form a connection and stream data

TCP Handshake
Verifies both devices before allowing any further communications to take place. 
Once communication is established using a TCP handshake, a request is made to the network

Address Resolution Protocol (or ARP)
Used to determine the MAC address of the next router or device on the path. 
This ensures that the data gets to the right place. 
Doesn’t have a specific port number

Domain Name System, or DNS
A network protocol that translate internet domain names into IP addresses. 
The DNS protocol sends the domain name and the web address to a DNS server that retrieves the IP address of the website you were trying to access

Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
Used for monitoring and managing devices on a network
Can be used to reset a password on a network devices or change its baseline configuration. 
Can also send requests to network devices for a report on how much of the network’s bandwidth is being used up. 
Occurs in the Application layer 

Internet Conrol Message Protocol (ICMP)
Used by devices to tell each other about data transmission errors across the network
Used by a receiving device to send a report to the sending device about the data transmission
Commonly used as a way to troubleshoot network connectivity and latency by issuing the “ping” command on a Linux operating system
Occurs at the Internet Layer

Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure, or HTTPS
A network protocol that provides a secure method of communication between client and website servers. It allows your web browser to securely send a request for a webpage to the Yummy Recipes For Me server and receive a webpage as a response.

Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP)
Used to securely transfer files from one device to another over a unsecured network 
Uses Secure Shell (SSH), typically though TCP port 22
SSH uses Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) and other types of encryption to ensure that unintended recipients cannot intercept the transmissions. 
Occurs at the Application layer
Used often with cloud storage. 
Every time a user uploads or downloads a file from cloud storage, the file is transferred using the SFTP protocol. 

Network Address Translation (NAT)
Enables private IP networks to use the internet and cloud. 
NAT translates private iP addresses in an internal network to a public IP address before packets are sent to an external network
Occurs in the layer 2 (Internet Layer) and Layer 3 (Transport layer)

Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
management family of network protocols. 
DHCP is an application layer protocol used on a network to configure devices. 
It assigns a unique IP address and provides the addresses of the appropriate DNS server and default gateway for each device. 
DHCP servers operate on UDP port 67 while DHCP clients operate on UDP port 68.

Telnet
An application layer protocol that allows a device to communicate with another device or server
Telnet sends all information in clear text. 
It uses command line prompts to control another device similar to secure shell (SSH), but Telnet is not as secure as SSH. 
Telnet can be used to connect to local or remote devices
Uses TCP port 23.

Secure shell protocol (SSH) 
used to create a secure connection with a remote system. This application layer protocol provides an alternative for secure authentication and encrypted communication. 
SSH operates over the TCP port 22 and is a replacement for less secure protocols, such as Telnet.

Post Office Protocol (POP)
An application layer (layer 4 of the TCP/IP model) protocol used to manage and retrieve email from a mail server.
Many organizations have a dedicated mail server on the network that handles incoming and outgoing mail for users on the network
Unencrypted, plaintext authentication uses TCP/UDP port 110 
Encrypted emails use Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) over TCP/UDP port 995

Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)
used for incoming email. It downloads the headers of emails, but not the content. 
The content remains on the email server, which allows users to access their email from multiple devices. 
IMAP uses TCP port 143 for unencrypted email
TCP port 993 over the TLS protocol. 
Using IMAP allows users to partially read email before it is finished downloading and to sync emails.
However, IMAP is slower than POP3.

Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) 
Used to transmit and route email from the sender to the recipient’s address. 
SMTP works with Message Transfer Agent (MTA) software, which searches DNS servers to resolve email addresses to IP addresses, to ensure emails reach their intended destination. 
SMTP uses TCP/UDP port 25 for unencrypted emails 
TCP/UDP port 587 using TLS for encrypted emails. 
The TCP port 25 is often used by high-volume spam.
SMTP helps to filter out spam by regulating how many emails a source can send at a time.

Protocol
Port
DHCP
UDP port 67 (servers)

UDP port 68 (clients)


ARP
none
Telnet
TCP port 23
SSH
TCP port 22
POP3
TCP/UDP port 110 (unencrypted)

TCP/UDP port 995 (encrypted, SSL/TLS)


IMAP
TCP port 143 (unencrypted)

TCP port 993 (encrypted, SSL/TLS)


SMTP
TCP/UDP port 587 (encrypted, TLS)



Wireless Protocols

EEE802.11, commonly known as Wi-Fi
A set of standards that define communications for wireless LANs.
 IEEE stands for the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, which is an organization that maintains Wi-Fi standards, and 802.11 is a suite of protocols used in wireless communications.

WiFi Protected Access (WPA)
A wireless security protocol for devices to connect to the internet

Wired equivalent privacy (WEP) 
A wireless security protocol designed to provide users with the same level of privacy on wireless network connections as they have on wired network connections

WPA2
The second version of Wi-Fi Protected Access—known as WPA2—was released in 2004. WPA2 improves upon WPA by using the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)
WPA2 personal mode is best suited for home networks for a variety of reasons. It is easy to implement, initial setup takes less time for personal than enterprise version. 

WPA2 enterprise mode works best for business applications. It provides the necessary security for wireless networks in business settings. The initial setup is more complicated than WPA2 personal mode, but enterprise mode offers individualized and centralized control over the Wi-Fi access to a business network. 


WPA3 
A secure Wi-Fi protocol is growing in usage as more WPA3-compatible devices are released. 
These are the key differences between WPA2 and WPA3:

WPA3 addresses the authentication handshake vulnerability to KRACK attacks, which is present in WPA2. 

WPA3 uses Simultaneous Authentication of Equals (SAE), a password-authenticated, cipher-key-sharing agreement. This prevents attackers from downloading data from wireless network connections to their systems to attempt to decode it.

WPA3 has increased encryption to make passwords more secure by using 128-bit encryption, with WPA3-Enterprise mode offering optional 192-bit encryption.



Firewall 
A network security device that monitors traffic to and from your network
It either allows traffic or blocks it based on a defined set of security rules. 
A firewall can use port filtering, which blocks or allows certain port numbers to limit unwanted communication. 
For example, it could have a rule that only allows communications on port 443 for HTTPS or port 25 for email and blocks everything else. 
These firewall settings will be determined by the organization's security policy.

Hardware firewall 
Inspects each data packet before it's allowed to enter the network

Software firewall 
Performs the same functions as a hardware firewall, but it's not a physical device. Cost less than hardware firewall 
A software program is installed on a computer or on a server. 
If the software firewall is installed on a computer, it will analyze all the traffic received by that computer.
Suppose the software firewall is installed on a server. In that case, it will protect all the devices connected to the server

Firewall as a Service (FaaS)
Cloud-based firewalls software firewalls hosted by a cloud service provider.
Organizations can configure the firewall rules on the cloud service provider's interface, and the firewall will perform security operations on all incoming traffic before it reaches the organization’s onsite network.
Cloud-based firewalls also protect any assets or processes an organization might use in the cloud.

Stateful firewall 
Refers to a class of firewalls that keeps track of information passing through it and proactively filters out threats.
Analyze network traffic for characteristics and behaviors that appear suspicious and stop them from entering the network. 

Stateless firewall
Refers to a class of firewalls that operates based on predefined rules and does not keep track of information from data packets. 
A stateless firewall only acts according to preconfigured rules set by the firewall administrator. 
It doesn't store analyzed information. 
It also doesn't discover suspicious trends like a stateful firewall does. For this reason, stateless firewalls are considered less secure than stateful firewalls.

Next-generation firewall(or NGFW)
Provides even more security than a stateful firewall. 
Not only does an NGFW provide stateful inspection of incoming and outgoing traffic, but it also performs more in-depth security functions like deep packet inspection and intrusion protection. 
Some NGFWs connect to cloud-based threat intelligence services so they can quickly update to protect against emerging cyber threats.

Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)
A service that encrypts data in transit and disguises your IP address
Changes your public IP address and hides your virtual location so that you can keep your data private when you're using a public network like the internet.
Also, encrypt your data as it travels across the internet to preserve confidentiality. 
A VPN service performs encapsulation on your data in transit. Encapsulation is a process performed by a VPN service that protects your data by wrapping sensitive data in other data packets.
VPN services encrypt your data packets and encapsulate them in other data packets that the routers can read. This allows your network requests to reach their destination but still encrypts your personal data so it's unreadable while in transit.
A VPN also uses an encrypted tunnel between your device and the VPN server. The encryption is unhackable without a cryptographic key, so no one can access your data.
VPN is similar to a network protocol: It’s a set of rules or instructions that will determine how data moves between endpoints. 

Types of VPNs:
Remote Access
Establishes  a connection between a personal device and a VPN server and encrypt or decrypt data exchanged with a personal device

Site-to-site
 Enterprises use site-to-site VPNs largely to extend their network to different locations and networks. 

Network segmentation
A security technique that divides the network into segments
Each network segment has its own access permissions and security rules

Security zones 
Control who can access different segments of a network. 
Act as a barrier to internal networks, maintain privacy within corporate groups and prevent issues from spreading to the whole network. 
One example of network segmentation is a hotel that offers free public Wi-Fi. The unsecured guest network is kept separate from another encrypted network used by the hotel staff.

Types of Security Zones

Uncontrolled zone
any network outside of the organization's control, like the internet

Controlled Zone
A subnet that protects the internal network from the uncontrolled zone.

Areas in a Controlled Zone
A demilitarized zone (or DMZ) 
Contains public-facing services that can access the internet
This includes web servers, proxy servers that host websites for the public, and DNS servers that provide IP addresses for internet users. It also includes email and file servers that handle external communications
The DMZ acts as a network perimeter to the internal network.
	The DMZ is situated between two firewalls:
One of them filters traffic outside the DMZ, and one of them filters traffic entering the internal network. This protects the internal network with several lines of defense.

Internal network 
Contains private servers and data that the organization needs to protect. 
Inside the internal network is another zone called the restricted zone. 
The restricted zone protects highly confidential information that is only accessible to employees with certain privileges.

Restricted Zone
Highly confidential information that is only accessible to employees with certain privileges.
If there's a restricted zone, that too would be protected with another firewall

As a security analyst, you may be responsible for regulating access control policies on these firewalls. Security teams can control traffic reaching the DMZ and the internal network by restricting IPs and ports. For example, an analyst may ensure that only HTTPS traffic is allowed to access web servers in the DMZ.

Subnetting 
The subdivision of a network into logical groups called subnets. It works like a network inside a network. 
These smaller subnets form based on the IP addresses and network masks of the devices on the network. 
Subnetting creates a network of devices to function as their own network. This makes the network more efficient and can also be used to create security zones. 
It allows network professionals and analysts to create a network within their own network without requesting another network IP address from their internet service provider.

Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) 
A method of assigning subnet masks to IP addresses to create a subnet
CIDR allows cybersecurity professionals to segment classful networks into smaller chunks. 
Classless CIDR addressing expanded the number of available IPv4 addresses. 
Example of CIDR IP address: 198.51.100.0/24, which encompasses all IP addresses between 198.51.100.0 and 198.51.100.255. 
The system of CIDR addressing reduces the number of entries in routing tables and provides more available IP addresses within networks

Proxy Server
Utilizes network address translation (NAT) to serve as a barrier between clients on the network and external threats.
A server that fulfills the request of a client by forwarding them on to other servers. 
When a request to connect to the network comes in from the internet, the proxy server will determine if the connection request is safe. 
The proxy server is a public IP address that is different from the rest of the private network. This hides the private network's IP address from malicious actors on the internet and adds a layer of security.
It can also be used to block unsafe websites that users aren't allowed to access on an organization's network. 
A proxy server uses temporary memory to store data that's regularly requested by external servers. 
This way, it doesn't have to fetch data from an organization's internal servers every time. This enhances security by reducing contact with the internal server.

Types of Proxy Servers
Forward proxy server
Handles queries from internal clients when they access resources external to the network
Regulates and restricts a person with access to the internet. 
The goal is to hide a user's IP address and approve all outgoing requests. 
In the context of an organization, a forward proxy server receives outgoing traffic from an employee, approves it, and then forwards it on to the destination on the internet.

Reverse proxy server 
Handles requests from external systems to services on the internal network
Regulates and restricts the internet access to an internal server. 
The goal is to accept traffic from external parties, approve it, and forward it to the internal servers. 
This setup is useful for protecting internal web servers containing confidential data from exposing their IP address to external parties

Email proxy server
Another valuable security tool.
It filters spam email by verifying whether a sender's address was forged. 
This reduces the risk of phishing attacks that impersonate people known to the organization.

WireGuard VPN
High-speed VPN protocol, with advanced encryption, to protect users when they are accessing the internet. It’s designed to be simple to set up and maintain.
This protocol is useful for processes that require faster download speeds, such as streaming video content or downloading large files.
Can be used for both site-to-site and remote access connections.


IPSec VPN
Another VPN protocol that may be used to set up VPNs. Most VPN providers use IPSec to encrypt and authenticate data packets in order to establish secure, encrypted connections. 
Since IPSec is one of the earlier VPN protocols, many operating systems support IPSec from VPN providers.
Can be used to create site-to-site connections 
Some clients may prefer IPSec due to its longer history of use, extensive security testing, and widespread adoption. However, others may prefer WireGuard because of its potential for better performance and simpler configuration.



Network Interception Attacks 
Work by intercepting network traffic and stealing valuable information or interfering with the transmission in some way.
In addition to seeing information that they are not entitled to, malicious actors can also intercept network traffic and alter it. These attacks can cause damage to an organization’s network by inserting malicious code modifications or altering the message and interrupting network operations. 
For example, an attacker can intercept a bank transfer and change the account receiving the funds to one that the attacker controls.

Packet Sniffing
Use hardware or software tools to capture and inspect data in transit

Backdoor Attack
Backdoors are weaknesses intentionally left by programmers or system and network administrators that bypass normal access control mechanisms. 
Backdoors are intended to help programmers conduct troubleshooting or administrative tasks. However, backdoors can also be installed by attackers after they’ve compromised an organization to ensure they have persistent access.
Once the hacker has entered an insecure network through a backdoor, they can cause extensive damage: installing malware, performing a denial of service (DoS) attack, stealing private information or changing other security settings that leaves the system vulnerable to other attacks

Possible impacts on an organization
Financial → due to interruption in operations
Reputation → loose customer trust 
Public safety → e.g. may lose power if a power grid is attacked

Denial of Servier(or DoS) attack 
An attack that targets a network or server and floods it with network traffic.
The objective of a denial of service attack, or a DoS attack, is to disrupt normal business operations by overloading an organization's network. 
The goal of the attack is to send so much information to a network device that it crashes or is unable to respond to legitimate users. This means that the organization won't be able to conduct their normal business operations, which can cost them money and time
A network crash can also leave them vulnerable to other security threats and attacks.

Distributed Denial of Service Attack (or DDoS) 
Kind of DoS attack that uses multiple devices or servers in different locations to flood the target network with unwanted traffic. 
Use of numerous devices makes it more likely that the total amount of traffic sent will overwhelm the target server.

Types of DoS Attacks

SYN flood attack
Attack that simulates the TCP connection and floods the server with SYN packets
Malicious actors can take advantage of the protocol by flooding a server with SYN packet requests for the first part of the handshake. But if the number of SYN requests is larger than the number of available ports on the server, then the server will be overwhelmed and become unable to function.
Takes advantage of communication protocols by sending an overwhelming number of requests

Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) Attack
ICMP is an internet protocol used by devices to tell each other about data transmission errors across the network.
Think of ICMP like a request for a status update from a device. 
Think of this like the ICMP request checking in with the device to make sure that all is well.
ICMP attack is performed by an attacker repeatedly sending ICMP packets to a network server. This forces the server to send an ICMP packet. This eventually uses up all the bandwidth for incoming and outgoing traffic and causes the server to crash.
Takes advantage of communication protocols by sending an overwhelming number of requests

Ping of Death Attack 
A type of DoS attack that is caused when a hacker pings a system by sending it an oversized ICMP packet that is bigger than 64 kilobytes, the maximum size for a correctly formed ICMP packet
Pinging a vulnerable network server with an oversized ICMP packet will overload the system and cause it to crash. 
Think of this like dropping a rock on a small anthill. Each individual ant can carry a certain amount of weight while transporting food to and from the anthill. But if a large rock is dropped on the anthill, then many ants will be crushed, and the colony is unable to function until it rebuilds its operations elsewhere.

Network protocol analyzer
Sometimes called a packet sniffer or a packet analyzer
A tool designed to capture and analyze data traffic within a network. 
They are commonly used as investigative tools to monitor networks and identify suspicious activity. There are a wide variety of network protocol analyzers available, but some of the most common analyzers include:
Wireshark
tcpdump
SolarWinds NetFlow Traffic Analyzer
ManageEngine OpManager
Azure Network Watcher

Tcpdump
A command-line network protocol analyzer. 
It is popular, lightweight–meaning it uses little memory and has a low CPU usage–and uses the open-source libpcap library.
 tcpdump is text based, meaning all commands in tcpdump are executed in the terminal. 
It provides a brief packet analysis and converts key information about network traffic into formats easily read by humans. 
It prints information about each packet directly into your terminal.
 tcpdump also displays the source IP address, destination IP addresses, and the port numbers being used in the communications. 
It prints the output of the command as the sniffed packets in the command line, and optionally to a log file, after a command is executed. The output of a packet capture contains many pieces of important information about the network traffic. 

Some information you receive from a packet capture includes: 
Timestamp
The output begins with the timestamp, formatted as hours, minutes, seconds, and fractions of a second.  

Source IP
The packet’s origin is provided by its source IP address.

Source port
This port number is where the packet originated.

Destination IP
The destination IP address is where the packet is being transmitted.

Destination port 
This port number is where the packet is being transmitted.

Common uses of network protocol analyzers:
Used to capture and view network communications and to collect statistics about the network, such as troubleshooting network performance issues.

Establish a baseline for network traffic patterns and network utilization metrics.

Detect and identify malicious traffic

Create customized alerts to send the right notifications when network issues or security threats arise.

Locate unauthorized instant messaging (IM), traffic, or wireless access points.

Can also be used by attackers to gain information about a specific network. For example, attackers can capture data packets that contain sensitive information, such as account usernames and passwords

Packet sniffing 
Practice of using software tools to observe data as it moves across a network. 
As a security analyst, you may use packet sniffing to analyze and capture packets when investigating ongoing incidents or debugging network issues.
Packet sniffing can be passive or active.
Ways to prevent malicious packet sniffing
Use a VPN
Make sure the website uses HTTPS
Avoid using unprotected WIFI if you don't have a VPN set up

Passive packet sniffing 
Type of attack where data packets are read in transit.

Active packet sniffing 
Type of attack where data packets are manipulated in transit. This may include injecting internet protocols to redirect the packets to an unintended port or changing the information the packet contains.

IP spoofing
Network attack is performed when an attacker changes the source IP of a data packet to impersonate an authorized system and gain access to a network
In this kind of attack, the hacker is pretending to be someone they are not so they can communicate over the network with the target computer and get past firewall rules that may prevent outside traffic. 

Some common IP spoofing attacks are:

On-path attacks
Sometimes referred to as a meddler-in-the middle attack 
An attack where the malicious actor places themselves in the middle of an authorized connection and intercepts or alters the data in transit. 
On-path attackers gain access to the network and put themselves between two devices, like a web browser and a web server. 
Then they sniff the packet information to learn the IP and MAC addresses of the devices that are communicating with each other. 
After they have this information, they can pretend to be either of these devices.

Replay attacks
A network attack performed when a malicious actor intercepts a data packet in transit and delays it or repeats it at another time. 
A delayed packet can cause connection issues between target computers, or a malicious actor may take a network transmission that was sent by an authorized user and repeat it at a later time to impersonate the authorized user.

Smurf attacks
A combination of a DDoS attack and an IP spoofing attack. 
The attacker sniffs an authorized user's IP address and floods it with packets. 
This overwhelms the target computer and can bring down a server or the entire network.

How to protect the network from this kind of IP Spoofing

Encryption 
should always be implemented so that the data in your network transfers can't be read by malicious actors.

Firewall Configuration
IP spoofing makes it seem like the malicious actor is an authorized user by changing the sender's address of the data packet to match the target network's address.
So if a firewall receives a data packet from the internet where the sender's IP address is the same as the private network, then the firewall will deny the transmission since all the devices with that IP address should already be on the local network. 
You can make sure that your firewalls are configured correctly by creating a rule to reject all incoming traffic that has the same IP address as the local network.

Network Interface Card (NIC) 
A piece of hardware that connects the device to a network. 
The NIC reads the data transmission, and if it contains the device’s MAC address, it accepts the packet and sends it to the device to process the information based on the protocol. 












Attack Surface
Refers too all the potential vulnerabilities a threat actor could potentiall exploit in a system. 

Security Hardening
The process of strengthening a system to reduce its vulnerability and attack surface. 
All the potential vulnerabilities that a threat actor could exploit are referred to as a system's attack surface.
As part of security hardening, security analysts perform regular maintenance procedures to keep network devices and systems functioning securely and optimally. 
Security hardening can be conducted on any device or system that can be compromised, such as hardware, operating systems, applications, computer networks, and databases

Some common types of hardening procedures include:
Software updates, also called patches

Device application configuration changes. 
An example of a security configuration change would be requiring longer passwords or more frequent password changes. 
This makes it harder for a malicious actor to gain login credentials. 
An example of a configuration check is updating the encryption standards for data that is stored in a database. 
Keeping encryption up to date makes it harder for malicious actors to access the database.

Removing or disabling unused applications and services, disabling unused ports, and reducing access permissions across devices and network
Minimizing the number of applications, devices, ports, and access permissions makes network and device monitoring more efficient and reduces the overall attack surface, which is one of the best ways to secure an organization

Conduct regular penetration testing
A penetration test, also called a pen test, is a simulated attack that helps identify vulnerabilities in a system, network, website, application, and process. 
Penetration testers document their findings in a report.
Depending on where the test fails, security teams can determine the type of security vulnerabilities that require fixing. 
Organizations can then review these vulnerabilities and come up with a plan to fix them.






Operating System (OS)
The interface between computer hardware and the user
Acts as an intermediary between software applications and the computer hardware.
It's important to secure the OS in each system because one insecure OS can lead to a whole network being compromised.

OS Hardening 
A set of procedures that maintains OS security and improves it. 
Security measures like access privileges and password policies frequently undergo regular security checks as part of OS hardening

Operating System (OS) Hardening  Tasks:
Keeping up-to-date list of devices and authorized users

Patch installation, also known as patch updates
Updates that addresses security vulnerabilities within a program or product.
With patch updates, the OS should be upgraded to its latest software version. Sometimes patches are released to fix a security vulnerability in the software. As soon as OS vendors publish a patch and the vulnerability fix, malicious actors know exactly where the vulnerability is in systems running the out-of-date OS.
The newly updated OS should be added to the baseline configuration, also called the baseline image.

Hardware and software disposal
This ensures that all old hardware is properly wiped and disposed of. 
It's also a good idea to delete any unused software applications since some popular programming languages have known vulnerabilities
Removing unused software makes sure that there aren't any unnecessary vulnerabilities connected with the programs that the software uses.

 Implementing a strong password policy. 
Strong password policies require that passwords follow specific rules. 
For example, an organization may set a password policy that requires a minimum of eight characters, a capital letter, a number, and a symbol. 
To discourage malicious actors, a password policy usually states that a user will lose access to the network after entering the wrong password a certain number of times in a row. Some systems also require multi-factor authentication, or MFA. 

Baseline Configuration 
A documented set of specifications within a system that is used as a basis for future builds, releases, and updates
For example, a baseline may contain a firewall rule with a list of allowed and disallowed network ports. If a security team suspects unusual activity affecting the OS, they can compare the current configuration to the baseline and make sure that nothing has been changed.

Multi-factor authentication, or MFA
A security measure which requires a user to verify their identity in two or more ways to access a system or network. 

Categories of multi-factor identification: 
Something you know, like a password, 
Something you have like an ID card 
Something unique about you, like your fingerprint.

Brute Force Attack
Trial-and-error process of discovering private information. 

Types of brute force attacks include:

Simple brute force attacks
When attackers try to guess a user's login credentials, it’s considered a simple brute force attack. 
They might do this by entering any combination of usernames and passwords that they can think of until they find the one that works.

Dictionary attacks use a similar technique 
Attackers use a list of commonly used passwords and stolen credentials from previous breaches to access a system. 
These are called “dictionary” attacks because attackers originally used a list of words from the dictionary to guess the passwords, before complex password rules became a common security practice. 

Some common measures used  to prevent brute force attacks and similar attacks from occurring include: 

Salting and hashing
Hashing converts information into a unique value that can then be used to determine its integrity. It is a one-way function, meaning it is impossible to decrypt and obtain the original text. 
Salting adds random characters to hashed passwords. This increases the length and complexity of hash values, making them more secure.

Multi-factor authentication (MFA) and two-factor authentication (2FA)
MFA is a security measure which requires a user to verify their identity in two or more ways to access a system or network.

CAPTCHA and reCAPTCHA
CAPTCHA stands for Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart. It asks users to complete a simple test that proves they are human. 
This helps prevent software from trying to brute force a password. 
reCAPTCHA is a free CAPTCHA service from Google that helps protect websites from bots and malicious software.

Password policies
Organizations use password policies to standardize good password practices throughout the business. 
Policies can include guidelines on how complex a password should be, how often users need to update passwords, and if there are limits to how many times a user can attempt to log in before their account is suspended.

Virtual machines (VMs) 
Software versions of physical computers
VMs provide an additional layer of security for an organization because they can be used to run code in an isolated environment, preventing malicious code from affecting the rest of the computer or system. 
VMs are useful when investigating potentially infected machines or running malware in a constrained environment. 




Sandbox 
A type of testing environment that allows you to execute software or programs separate from your network.
They are commonly used for testing patches, identifying and addressing bugs, or detecting cybersecurity vulnerabilities. 
Sandboxes can also be used to evaluate suspicious software, evaluate files containing malicious code, and simulate attack scenarios. 







Network Hardening
Focuses on network-related security hardening, like:
Port filtering
Network access privileges
Encryption over networks

Network Hardening that are regularly performed:
Firewall rules and maintenance
Network log Analysis
Patch updates
Server backups

Network Hardening that are performed once:
Port filtering on firewalls
Network access privileges
Encryption for communication
Network Segmentation to create isolated subnets for different departments
Only authorized users are given access to the subnets that are required for their role

Network log Analysis
Process of examining network logs to identify events of interest. 
ecurity teams use a log analyzer tool or a security information and event management tool, also known as a SIEM, to conduct network log analysis.

SIEM tool
An application that collects and analyzes log data to monitor critical activities in an organization. 
It gathers security data from a network and presents that data on a single dashboard. 
The dashboard interface is sometimes called a single pane of glass. 
A SIEM helps analysts to inspect, analyze, and react to security events across the network based on their priority. 
Reports from the SIEM provide a list of new or ongoing network vulnerabilities and list them on a scale of priority from high to low, where high priority vulnerabilities have a much shorter deadline for mitigation.

Port filtering
A firewall function that blocks or allows certain number to limit unwanted communication
Only ports that are needed are the ones that are allowed
This protects from port vulnerabilities 




Firewall 
Allow or block traffic based on a set of rules
Each system should have its own firewall, regardless of the network firewall




